A LETTER, Containing a most brief Discourse Apologeticall, with a plain
Demonstration, and fervent Protestation, for the lawful, sincere, very
faithful and Christian course, of the Philosophical studies and exercises, of
a certain studious Gentleman: An ancient Servant to her most excellent
Majesty Royal.

Pro eo, vt me diligerent, detrahebant mihi:


To the most Reverend father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Canturbury, Primate
and Metropolitan of all England, one of her Majesty's most honorable privy
Counsel: my singular good Lord.
MOst humbly and heartily I crave your Graces pardon, if I offend any thing, to
send, or present unto your Graces hand, so simple a discourse as this is:
Although, by some sage and discreet my friends their opinion, it is thought not
to be impertinent, to my most needful suites, presently in hand, (before her
most excellent Majesty Royal, your Lordships good Grace, and other the Right
honorable Lords of her Majesty's privy Counsel) to make some part of my
former studies, and studious exercises (within and for these 46, years last
past, used and continued) to be first known and discovered unto your Grace,
and other the Right honorable my good Lords, of her Majesty's privy Counsel:
And, Secondly, afterward, the same to be permitted to come to public view:
Not so much, to stop the mouths, and, at length to stay the impudent
attemptes, of the rash, and malicious deuisers, and contriuers of most untrue,
foolish, and wicked reports, and fables, of, and concerning my foresaid
studious exercises, passed over, with my great, (yea incredible) pains,
travels, cares, and costs, in the search, and learning of true Philosophy; As,
therein, So, to certify, and satisfy the godly and impartial Christian
hearer, or reader hereof: That, by his own judgment, (upon his due
consideration, and examination of this, no little parcel, of the particulars
of my foresaid studies, and exercises philosophical annexed) He will, or may,
be sufficiently informed, and persuaded; That I have wonderfully labored, to
find, follow, use, and haunt the true, straight, and most narrow path, leading
all true, devout, zealous, faithful, and constant Christian students, ex valle
hac miseriae, and miseria istius vallis: and tenebrarum Regno; and tenebris
istius Regni, ad montem sanctum Syon, and ad caelestia tabernacula. All
thanks, are most due, therefore, unto the Almighty: Seeing, it so pleased him,
(even from my youth, by his divine favor, grace, and help) to insinuate into
my heart, an insatiable zeal, and desire, to know his truth: And in him, and
by him, incessantly to seek, and listen after the same; by the true
philosophical method and harmony: proceeding and ascending, (as it were)
gradatim, from things visible, to consider of things invisible: from things
bodily, to conceive of things spiritual: from things transitory, and
momentanie, to meditate of things permanent: by things mortal (visible and
invisible) to have some perceiuerance of immortality. And to conclude, most
briefly; by the most marvelous frame of the whole World, philosophically
viewed, and circumspectly wayed, numbered, and measured (according to the
talent, and gift of God, from above allotted, for his divine purposes effecting)
most faithfully to love, honor, and glorify always, the Framer, and Creator
thereof. In whose workmanship, his infinite goodness, unsearchable wisdom,
and Almighty power, yea, his everlasting Paul to the Romans Cap. 1. verse 19. 20.
power, and divinity, may (by innumerable means) be manifested, and
demonstrated. The truth of which my zealous, careful, and constant intent, and
endeavor specified; may (I hope) easily appear by the whole, full and due
survey, and consideration of all the Books, Treatises, and discourses, whose
Titles only, are, at this time, here annexed, and expressed: As they are set
down in the sixth Chapter, of an other little Rhapsodicall Treatise, entitled,
The Co^pendious Rehearsal, etc. written above two years since: for those her
Majesty's two honorable Commissioners; which her most excellent Majesty had
most graciously sent to my poor Cottage, in Mortlake: to understand the
matters, and causes at full; through which, I was so extremely urged to
procure at her Majesty's hands such honorable Surueiors and witnesses to be
assigned, for the due proof of the contents, of my most humble and pitiful
supplication, exhibited unto her most excellent Majesty, at Hampton Court, An.
1592. Nouemb. 9. Thus therefore (as follows) is ye said 6. Chapter there,
recorded.

My labors and pains bestowed at diverse times, to pleasure my native Country:
by writing of sundry Books, and Treatises: some in Latin, some in English,
and some of them, written, at her Majesty's commandment. Of which Books, and
Treatises, some are printed, and some unprinted. The printed Books, and
Treatises are these following:
Propaedeumata Aphoristica, De praestantioribus quibusda^ Naturae virtutibus.
-- Aphorismi. 120. -- Anno. 1558. Monas Hieroglyphica, Mathematice,
Anagogiceque explicata; ad Maximilianum (Dei gratia) Romanorum, Bohemiae, and
Hungariae, Regem sapientissimum an. 1564. Epistola ad eximium Ducis Vrbini
Mathematicum (Fredericum Commandinum) praefixa libello Machometi Bagdedini, De
superficierum Diuisionibus; edito in lucem, opera mea, and eiusdem Commandini
Vrbinatis; Impressa Pisauri -- Anno -- 1570. The Brytish Monarchy (otherwise
called the Petty Navy Royal:) for the politic security; abundant wealth, and
the triumphant state of this kingdom, (with Gods favor) procuring -- Anno --
1576. My Mathematical praeface annexed to Euclide, (by the right worshipful
Sir Henry Billingsley Knight, in the English language first published) written
at the earnest request of sundry right worshipful Knights, and other very well
learned men. Wherein are many Arts, of me, wholly invented (by name, definition,
propriety and use,) more then either the Grecian, or Roman Mathematiciens,
have left to our knowledge -- Anno -- 1570. My diverse and many Annotations, and
Inventions Mathematical, Epistola praefixa Ephemeridibus Ioannis Field Angli:
cui Paralaticae Co^mentationis, Praxeosque Nucleus quida^. 1573
The unprinted Books and Treatises, are these: some, perfectly finished: and
some, yet unfinished.
THe first great volume of Famous and rich Discoueries: The Brytish Complement,
of the perfect Art of Navigations; Her Majesty's Title Royal, to many foreign
Cuntries, kingdoms, proof recorded: and in 12. Velam skins of parchment,
fair written: for her Majesty's use: and at her Majesty's commandment -- anno
-- 1578 De Imperatoris Nomine, Authoritate, and Potentia: dedicated to her
Majesty -- anno -- 1579 Prolegomena and Dictata Parisiensia, in Euclidis
Elementorum Geometricorum, librum primum, and secundum; in Collegio Rhemensi --
anno -- 1550. De vsu Globi Caelestis: ad Regem Edoardum sextum. 1550 The Art of
Logic, in English -- anno -- 1547. The 13. Sophistical Fallacia^s, with
their Discoueries, written in English meter -- anno -- 1548. Mercurius
Caelestis: libri -- 24. written at Louayn -- 1549. De Nubium, Solis, Lunae, ac
reliquorum Planetarum, immo ipsius stelliferi Caeli, ab infimo Terrae Centro,
distantijs, mutuisque interuallis, and eorundem omnium Magnitudine liber (...),
ad Edoardum Sextum, Angliae Rege^. Anno -- 1551. Aphorismi Astrologici -- 300.
-- anno -- 1553. The true cause, and account (not vulgar) of Fluds and Ebbs:
written at the request of the right honorable Lady, Lady Jane, Duchess of
Northumberland -- anno -- 1553. The Philosophical and Poetical Original
occasions, of the Configurations, and names of the heavenly Asterismes --
written at the request of the same Duchess. Anno. 1553. The Astronomicall, and
logisticall rules, and Canons, to calculate the Ephemerides by, and other
necessary accounts of heavenly motions: written at the request, and for the use
of that excellent Mechanicien Master Richard Chauncelor, at his last voyage
into Moschouia -- anno -- 1553. De Acribologia Mathematica; volumen magnum:
sexdecim continens libros -- anno -- 1555 Inuentum Mechanicum, Paradoxum, De
noua ratione delineandi De speculis Comburentibus: libri sex -- Anno -- 1557.
De Perspectiua illa, qua peritissimi vtuntur Pictores. 1557. Speculum vnitatis:
sieve Apologia pro Fratre Rogerio Bachone De Annuli Astronomici multiplici vsu
-- lib. 2 -- Anno. 1557. Trochilica Inuenta -- lib -- 2 -- Anno -- 1558. (...)
-- lib -- 3 -- Anno -- 1558. De tertia and praecipua Perspectiuae part, quae
de Radiorum De Itinere subterraneo -- libri -- 2 -- Anno -- 1560. De
Triangulorum rectilineorum Areis -- libri -- 3 -- demonstrati: Cabalae
Hebraicae compendiosa tabella -- Anno -- 1562. Reipublicae Britannicae
Synopsis: in English -- Anno. 1565. De Trigono Circinoque Analogico, Opusculum,
Mathematicum De stella admiranda, in Cassiopeae Asterismo, caelitus demissa
Hipparchus Rediuiuus -- Tractatulus -- Anno. 1573. De vnico Mago, and triplici
Herod, eoque Antichristiano. Ten sundry and very rare Heraldical Blasonings of
one Crest or Cognizance, lawfully confirmed to certain ancient Arms -- lib.
1. -- Anno -- 1574. Atlantidis, (vulgariter, Indiae Occidentalis nominatae)
emendatior de scriptio Hydrographica, quam vlla alia adhuc euulgata -- anno --
1580. De modo Euangelij Jesus Christi publicandi, propagandi, stabiliendique,
inter Infideles Atlanticos: volumen magnum, libris distinctum quatuor: quoru^
primus ad Serenissimam nostram Potentissimamque Reginam Elizabetham
inscribitur: Secundus, ad summos priuati suae sacrae Maiestatis consilij
senatores: Tertius, ad Hispaniarum Regem, Philippum: Quartus, ad Pontificem
Romanum -- anno 1581. Nauigationis ad Cathayum per Septentrionalia Scythiae and
Tartariae litora, Delineatio Hydrographica: Arthuro Pit, and Carolo Iackmanno
Anglis, versus illas parts Nauigaturis, in manus tradita; cum admiraendarum
quarundam Insularum annotatione, in illis subpolaribus partibus iacentium --
anno -- 1580. Hemisphaerij Borealis Geographica, at que Hydrographica
descriptio: long a vulgatis chartis diuersa: Anglis quibusdam, versus
Atlantidis Septentrionalia litora, nauigationem instituentibus, dono data --
anno -- 6583 The Originals, and chief points, of our ancient Brytish,
Histories, discoursed upon, and examined -- anno -- 1583. An advise and
discourse about the Reformation of the vulgar Julian year -- written by her
Majesty's commandment, and the Lords of the privy Counsel -- anno -- 1582.
Certain considerations, and conferrings together, of these three sentences,
(aunciently accounted as Oracles) Nosce te ipsum: Homo Homini Deus: Homo Homini
Lupus. 1592 De hominis Corpore, Spiritu, and Anima: sieve Microcosmicum totius
Philosophiae Naturalis Compendium -- lib. 1 -- 1591
With many other books, pamphlets, discourses, inventions, and conclusions, in
diverse Arts and matters: whose names, need not in this Abstract to be
notified: The most part of all which, here specified, lie here before your
Honors upon the table, on your left hand. But by other books and writings,
of an other sort, (if it so please God, and that he will grant me life, health,
and due maintenance thereto, for some ten or twelve years next ensuing) I may,
hereafter make plain, and without doubt, this sentence to be true, Plura
latent, quam patent.

Thus far (my good Lord) have I set down this Catalogus, out of the foresaid
sixth Chapter, of the book, whose title is this: The Compendious rehearsal of
John Dee, his dutiful declaration

To which compendious rehearsal, does now belong an Appendix, of these two
last years: In which I have had many just occasions, to confess, that Homo
Homini Deus, and Homo Homini Lupus, was and is an Argument, worthy of the
decyphering, and large discussing: as may, one day, hereafter (by Gods help)
be published, in some manner very strange. And besides all the rehearsed books,
and treatises of my writing, or handling hitherto, I have just cause, lately
given me to write and publish a Treatise, with Title, De Horizonte
Aeternitatis: Andreas Libauius, in a book of his, printed the last year, has
unduly considered a phrase of my Monas Hieroglyphica: to his misliking: by his
own unskillfulness in such matter: and not understanding my apt application
thereof, in one of the very principal places, It may now be here also
remembered, that almost three years after the writing of this letter, I did
somewhat satisfy the request of an honorable friend in Court, by speedily
penning some matter concerning her majesty's Sea-soueraigntie: under this title
Thalattocratia Brytannica.
of the whole book. And this book of mine, (by Gods help and favor) shall be
dedicated unto her most excellent majesty Royal: And this Treatise does
contain three books, Sieve,

De Brytanico Maris Imperio, Collectanea Extemporanea: 4. dierum Spacio, celeri
conscripta calamo. Anno. 1597. -- September. 20, Mancestriae.


The first entitled,

Truly I have great cause to praise and thank God, for your graces very
charitable using of me: both in sundry points else, and also in your favorable
yelding to, yea and notifying the due means for the performance of her Sacred
Majesty's most gracious and bountiful disposition, resolution, and very royal
beginning, to restore and give unto me (her Ancient faithful servant) some due
maintenance: to lead the rest of my old days, in some quiet and comfort: with
ability, to retain some speedy, fair, and Orthographicall writers, about
me; and the same skillful in Latin and Greek (at the least:) as well for mine
own books, and works, fair and correctly to be written (such I mean, as
either her most excellent Majesty, out of the premises will make choice of,
or command to be finished or published: or such of them, as your grace shall
think meet or worthy for my farther labor to be bestowed on:) as else for the
speedy, fair, and true writing out of other ancient Authors their good and
rare works, in greek or Latin: which by Gods providence, have been preserved
from the spoil made of my Library, and of all my moveable goods here: etc.
Anno. 1583. Although that my last voyage beyond ye Seas, was duly vndertake^
(by her Majesty's good favor and license) as by the same words may appear in
the Letter, written by the right honorable Lord Threasorer, unto your grace in
my behalf, and her most excellent majesty willing his honor so to do. Anno.
1590. the 20. of January.
In which Library, were about 4000 books: whereof, 700. were anciently
written by hand: Some in Greek, some in Latin, some in Hebrew: And some in
other languages (as may by the whole Catalogus thereof appear.) But the great
losses and damages which in sundry sorts I have sustained, do not so much
grieve my heart, as the rash, lewd, fond, and most untrue fables and reports of
me, and my studies philosophical, have done, and yet do: which commonly, after
their first hatching, and devilish devising, immediately with great speed, are
generally all the Realm ouerspread; and to some, seem true; to other, they
are doubtful: and to only the wise, modest, discreet, godly, and charitable
(and chiefelie to such as have some acquaintance with me) they appear, and are
known to be fables, untruths, and utterly false reports, and sclaunders. Well,
this shall be my last charitable giving of warning, and fervent protestation to
my Countrymen and all other in this case:

Before the Almighty our God, A fervent protestation.
and your Lordships good grace, this day, on the peril of my souls damnation
(if I lie, or take his name in vain herein) I take the same God, to be my
witness; That, with all my heart, with all my soul, with all my strength,
power, and understanding (according to the measure thereof, which the Almighty
has given me) for the most part of the time, from my youth hitherto, I have
used, and still use, good, lawful, honest, christian, and divinely prescribed
means, to attain to the knowledge of those truths, which are meet, and
necessary for me to know; and wherewith to do his divine Majesty such service,
as he has, does, and will call me unto, during this my life: for his honor
and glory advancing, and for the benefit, and commodity public of this
kingdom; so much, as by the will, and purpose of God, shall lie in my skill,
and hability to perform: as a true, faithful, and most sincerely dutiful
servant, to our most gracious and incomparable Queen Elizabeth, and as a very
comfortable fellow-member of the body politic, governed under the scepter
Royal of our earthly Supreme head (Queen Elizabeth) and as a lively
sympathicall, and true symetricall fellow-member, of that holy and mystical
body, Catholicklie extended and placed (wheresoever) on the earth: in the view,
knowledge, direction, protection, illumination, and consolation of the
Almighty, most blessed, most holy, most glorious, comaiesticall, coeternall,
and coessentiall Trinity: The head of that body, being only our Redeemer,
Christ Jesus, perfect God and perfect man: whose return in glory, we
faithfully awaite, and daily, do very earnestly cry unto him, to hasten his
second coming, for his electes sake: iniquity does so on this earth, abound,
and prevail, and true faith with charity, and Evangelical simplicity, have
but cold, slender, and uncertain intertainement, among the worldly-wise men
of this world.

Therefore (herein concluding) I beseech the Almighty God, most abundantly to
increase and confirm your graces heavenly wisdom, and endue you with all the
rest of his heavenly gifts, for the relieuing, refreshing, and comforting, both
bodily and spiritually, his little flock of the faithful, yet militant here
on earth. Amen.

An Epilogue.
Good my Lord, I beseech your grace, to allow of my plain and comfortable
Epilogus, for this matter at this time. Seeing, my studious exercises, and
conversation (though most briefly and speedily) to have warned or confounded
the scornful, the malicious, the proud, and the rash in their untrue reports,
opinions, and fables of my studies, or exercises Philosophical: but that, it
is of more importance, that the godly, the honest, the modest, the discreet,
grave, and charitable Christians (English or other,) lovers of Justice, truth,
and good learning, may, hereby, receive certain comfort in themselves (to
perceive, that Veritas tandem praeualebit) and sufficiently be weaponed and
armed with sound truth, to defend me against such kind of my adversaries: if
hereafter they will begin afresh, or hold on, obstinately, in their former
errors, vain imaginations, false reports, and most ungodly sclanders of me
and my studies. Therefore, (to make all this cause, for ever, before God and
man, out of all doubt:) Seeing, your Lordships good grace, are, as it were, our
high Priest, and chief Ecclesiastical minister, (under our most dread and
Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth) to whose censure and judgment, I submit
all my studies and exercises; yea all my books, past, present and hereafter to
be written, by me (of my own skill, judgment, or opinion,) I do, at this
present time, most humbly, sincerely, and unfeignedly, and in the name of
Almighty God, (yea for his honor and glory) request, and beseech your Grace,
(when, and as conveniently you may) to be well and thoroughly certified of me,
what I am, Intus and in cute: Reuerendissime in Christo Pater, and Dignissime
Archipraesul, cognosce and agnosce vultum tam internum, quam externum pecoris
tui: And wherein I have used, do or shall use, pen, speech, or conversation,
otherwise then as it appertains to a faithful, careful, sincere, and humble
servant of Christ Jesus, That your grace would vouchsafe to advertise me. So, I
trust, Vltima respondebunt primis: in such sort, as this Authentic Record in
latin annexed ( ad perpetuam rei memoriam,) does testify: having never,
hitherto, had occasion to show that, in any place of Christendom: to testify
better of me, then they had proof of me, themselves, by my conversation among
them. (The Almighty, therefore, be highly thanked, praised, honored, and
glorified, for ever and ever, Amen.)

But now, in respect of the general intent of this brief discourse, I most
humbly, and reverently, exhibit to your graces view, and perusing, the
original monument, and Authenticke Record, before mentioned, fair written in
parchment, with the seal whole, and perfect, duly appendant: as I have 46.
years, and somewhat longer, preserved it. The true copy whereof, your grace
does see, to be verbatim, as follows.

VNiuersis Sanctae matris Ecclesiae filijs, ad quos praesentes literae
peruenturae sunt, Vicecancellarius Caetusque omnis Regentium and non Regentium,
Vniuersitatis Cantabrigiae, Salutem in Domino sempiternam. Conditiones and
merita hominu^ in nostra Vniuersitate studentium, affectu sincero perpendentes,
eos solos testimonio nostro ornandos esse arbitramur, quos scimus ob
eruditionem, and morum probitatem promeritos esse, vt istud beneficium a nobis
consequantur: Quamobrem, cum hoc tempore, ipsa veritas testimonium nostrum sibi
postulat, vestrae pietati, per has literas significamus, Quod dilectus nobis in
Christo, Ioannes Dee, Artium Magister, in dicta nostra vniuersitate, foeliciter
versatus, plurimam sibi and doctrinae and honestatis laudem comparauit: De
cuius gradu, and conuersatione (quae honestissima semper fuit,) ne qua vspiam
ambiguitas, aut quaestio oriri possit, apud eos, quibus huius viri virtutes
haud satis innotuerint, visum est nobis, in dicti Ioannis gratiam, has literas
nostras Testimoniales conscribere; and conscriptas, publico Academiae nostrae
sigillo, obsignare: quo, maiorem apud vos authoritatem, and pondus literae
nostrae habeant, Been valete. Datum Cantabrigiae, in plena Conuocatione
Magistrorum Regentium, and non Regentium, Academiae praedictae: 14. Calend.
Aprilis, Anno a Christo nato. 1548.


For certain due respects the very image of the foresaid seal, is not here
in portraiture published.

Peroratio.
THe Almighty and most merciful God, the Father; for his only Son (our
Redeemer) Jesus Christ his sake: by his holy spirit, so direct, bless, and
prosper all my studies, and exercises Philosophical, (yea, all my thoughts,
words, and deeds) henceforward, even to the very moment of my departing from
this world, That I may evidently and abundantly be found, and undoubtedly
acknowledged of the wise and just, to have been a zealous and faithful
student in the School of Verity, and an Ancient Graduate in the School of
Charity: to the honor and glory of the same God Almighty, and to the sound
comfort and confirming of such as faithfully love and fear his divine
Majesty, and unfeignedly continue in labor to do good, on earth: when, while,
to whom, and as they may, Amen.

Very speedily written, this twelfth even, and twelfth day, in my poor
Cottage, at Mortlake: Anno. 1595. currente a Natiuitate Christi: ast, An. 1594.
Completo, a Conceptione eiusdem, cum nouem praeterea mensibus, Completis.

Allwaies, and very dutifully, at your Graces commandment: John Dee.

Psalm.118. Non moriar, sed viuam, and nartabo opera Domini: In sola Christi
cruce fixa est omnis nostris gloria. Apocalypsis. 5. Ecce, vicit Leo de tribu
Judah (radix David) aperire librum, and soluere septem Signacula eius. IEOVA,
FORTITVDO MEA, A QVO, TIMEBO. ANNO MVNDI NOVO INCHOANTE: VERITAS PREVALEBIT.


15^9


AT LONDON Printed by Peter Short, dwelling on Bredstreete hill at the sign of
the Star.


